Welcome.
I'm Darin Adler.
I'm the director of
Safari and WebKit Engineering.
We're going to talk a little bit
today about Safari and WebKit.
Now,
you use Safari for website development,
but maybe you've never thought
about what underlies Safari,
WebKit, the engine.
Or maybe you're coming to the
back in Tosh and you're not
really familiar with Safari.
You've heard it's the
name of the web browser.
or you may be someone who programs
with WebKit and uses WebKit and you'd
like to hear the latest about what's
happening with the technologies.
No matter which of these
three describes you,
this is the right session for you.
So let's talk about Safari and WebKit.
We're going to cover three things.
First of all,
I'll talk about what is Safari,
what is WebKit, how do they relate,
all that stuff,
and there's a few announcements
and new things to talk about there.
Then we'll talk about the approach
we use for WebKit development.
We call this open development and it's
open source and goes even beyond that.
and then we'll also tell you what's
new and show you some of the new
stuff we've been adding and give you
pointers to a whole bunch of sessions
throughout the week that cover new
developments in Safari and WebKit.
So let's start with the basics.
As most of you know,
there's the icon of Safari.
Safari is the web browser on Mac OS.
But it's recently been
joined by Safari for Windows,
which is the same Safari on Windows.
It's absolutely the same browser on both.
And in addition,
there's Safari on iPhone.
So this is the family
of Safari web browser.
Inside all of these is the same engine,
the browser engine, what we call WebKit.
and the same WebKit that's inside
Safari is available to you when
you're writing native applications
on both Mac OS X and on iPhone.
Now, what's been happening recently
with Safari is lots more
people have been using it.
In fact, if you take a look at the market
share from three years ago,
and that was when we first talked
about our new WebKit Open development
here at the Developers Conference,
you see that it's tripled
in those three years.
And with Safari being
used by a lot more people,
when you're developing a website,
how Safari behaves matters a lot to you.
Today, we'd like to announce a developer
preview of a new version of Safari.
The Safari 4 developer preview is
both on your Snow Leopard developer
preview DVDs for those of you
attending the developers conference.
But it's also something you can download.
And you can download it for Mac OS X to
work with either Tiger or Leopard.
And you can also download it for Windows.
And to get that, you just go to the
Apple developer website.
So if you go to connect.apple.com
and look at downloads,
you'll see the Safari 4 developer
preview download along with the others.
And so a lot of things we're
talking about today and things
we'll talk about throughout this
week are in these new versions,
the Safari 4 developer
preview and also iPhone 2.0.
And we'll mention that as we
talk about individual things.
So.
One of the things that I want to
help you understand is how sharing
the same underlying engine affects
these different versions of Safari.
So let's just talk just for a
moment about how the same WebKit in
all the different browsers,
there still might be some differences.
Now,
if you went to a session this morning,
the one just before this, it was great.
And if you didn't go,
you can get the audio of it after
the developers conference about
Safari development on iPhone.
One of the things you heard is that
Safari 3.1 on both desktop and iPhone,
it's the same basic version of Safari.
But there still are some differences.
One thing to understand is that
every release is always a snapshot.
Development is moving fast all the time.
We're doing all kinds of great stuff.
And so every release is a point in time.
And, you know, they're not going to be
identical points in time.
Also, there are differences
between the platforms.
And this morning's session was
really about that in depth.
How it affects you,
whether you have browser windows
that can be resized or using
the whole screen on iPhone,
the mouse input versus touch screen.
and in general though,
same engine means you
get the same behavior.
And so that means for 90%
of what you do on websites,
the fact that WebKit underlies all
the versions of Safari means that
the work you do to make it work well
with one version of Safari extends
to making it work well with all.
One thing mentioned up on the slide
here is the way a Safari update
means something different to an end
user or a website developer or to an
application developer using native apps.
Safari updates not only include
a new version of the web browser,
but they almost always include
a new version of the underlying
WebKit framework as well.
So if you're a native
application development,
some of those improvements and new
features are available to you in WebKit.
So we call them Safari updates
because to the end user or customer,
that's what it is, a Safari update.
But to you as a programmer,
you may think of it as a
Safari and WebKit update.
Now, to understand how to--what's
going on with Safari,
and in particular, to understand things
like if there's a bug,
should I report this to Apple or,
you know, should I--what system
might be responsible?
I want to show you a little picture
of how WebKit works with the platform.
Now, this is different from a lot
of other browser engines.
WebKit tries to use--well,
not just tries,
actually uses platform resources
and open source projects for all
sorts of things rather than having
them built right into the engine.
So there's a bunch of areas up here.
I'm even going to list them
because they're pretty interesting.
The networking and cookies,
that's really pretty unusual to
use a separate networking library.
It's not part of the browser.
There's a great
networking library to use.
Graphics, obviously,
don't write--we don't write all
of our own custom graphics code.
We use the platform graphics.
Unicode handling,
there's some great sophisticated
libraries for handling Unicode.
XML, the processing XML files,
parsing them correctly.
The XSL language,
which is a custom language
just for manipulating XML.
And also, more importantly,
what's something that's become
much more important recently as we
added more and more features that
really rely on this capability,
database functionality that's used
for everything from storing--.
The web pages that make
up web applications,
you'll hear about that later,
all the way down to the smallest
bits of data like storing the
little icons that show up next
to your URLs in the address bar.
So for all of these pieces,
there's an underlying
library that's used.
So WebKit doesn't try to do all
this stuff itself and it uses
these underlying libraries.
So if there are database problems,
sometimes the issue is
something that is fixed by a
new improved version of SQLite.
If there's a new
encoding to be supported,
it's the industry standard
ICU library that--where that shows up.
And so that's helpful when
you're trying to understand the
relationship of WebKit to other
Now just a few words about how WebKit,
itself, is structured.
Just briefly, there are two major pieces
of WebKit-- three major,
excuse me, pieces of WebKit.
The high-level one called
WebKit is the outside of WebKit.
It's how you get to WebKit.
It's where the WebKit API lives.
Inside WebKit is a
library called WebCore.
And WebCore is a platform
independent core,
whereas WebKit gives you the
perfect programming interface
for whatever platform you're
working on-- one that fits well,
for example,
with Cocoa when you're on Mac OS X,
fits well with Cocoa Touch when
you're on iPhone.
WebCore is the platform independent core.
In addition,
there's a separate library called
JavaScript Core with its own API.
And that lets you use
JavaScript even when you're not
in the context of a web page.
So you're free to use that high-speed
interpreter for any situation where
you want a programming library.
But you can use
JavaScript Core to do that.
And you can use JavaScript Core to
do that in any language.
Both of these are APIs-- this is where
the two APIs live-- the JavaScript Core
And of course,
Safari is built on top of these APIs.
So let's talk a little bit in
specific about one of the WebKit APIs.
This is just the Cocoa one on Mac OS X.
And there are similar
issues for the iPhone one,
but I just want to go a little in
depth about the Cocoa API on Mac OS X.
The basic concept here is
it's a classic Cocoa API.
It uses the Cocoa idioms.
It fits right in with the rest of the
Cocoa app kit and other frameworks.
And one of the things that it does
that I think makes it particularly
convenient to use is the WebView class
has this good default behavior.
It acts like a web
browser does by default.
You don't have to tell it to
do all the various things.
And then you can customize its behavior,
and there's a design pattern for
this in Cocoa called delegates.
So you supply objects,
and then the WebView will consult
these objects to ask various
questions about how it should behave.
And this WebKit API is
how Safari uses WebKit,
and it's also the basis for
many other applications.
Lots of our system applications use
WebKit for all sorts of purposes,
not just browsing.
And also,
there's tons of third-party applications
that have been built on this API.
The way we do development on WebKit is
a model that I call open development.
So first of all,
this is something that--you know,
part of this is open source.
You hear about open source all the time.
And what open source really means
is that the license is such that
the source code is available.
And you can take a look at the licenses
used in--the license used in WebKit.
It means that we'll always give
out the source code and the license
spells out what you can do with it.
But open development goes beyond just
having source code that's open and goes
to a process for developing so that
you can see the work as it happens.
You can get involved in the development,
but you can also see each change as it
arrives and follow WebKit development
a lot more closely than you can follow
development that's not done this way.
And you can also, when you file a bug,
see the progress on the bug.
That's why it's great to use the open
source bug database and watch people's
comments and what happens as the bug
is diagnosed and eventually fixed.
Now, I'd like to ask Mark Rowe,
an engineer from the
Safari and WebKit team,
to come up here and talk a little
bit more in depth about open
development and Safari and WebKit.
Thanks, Darin.
Hi, everyone.
I'm Mark Rowe.
I'm an engineer on the
Safari and WebKit team,
as Darren just mentioned.
The main point I want to get across
is that WebKit development is open.
It's not just source code.
The entire development process is open.
I'm going to touch on
three main points here.
The first is the number of resources
that are available to get involved
with the development of WebKit.
Then I'm going to talk about the
advantages that this development model
brings to you as users of WebKit,
as users of Safari as well,
and to Apple as well.
And third, about how you can get involved
with the WebKit project and how you
can contribute and the advantages
that can bring to you as well.
So first, the available resources.
The most obvious one is the source
code repository is publicly available.
You can download the source yourself,
you can compile it yourself,
and you can see changes as they happen.
Two other important things
are the public bug database,
which Darin touched on earlier,
and the downloadable nightly builds.
These two things go hand in hand.
You can download new
builds of WebKit every day.
You don't have to bother checking out
the code if you don't feel like it.
You can test out the latest changes,
and you can file bug reports.
When the bug reports are resolved,
you can download a new build,
verify the issue has actually been fixed.
Other important factor is communication.
We have developers spread
out all over the world.
We've had developers working from Russia,
Israel, Australia, New Zealand, Canada,
all over the place.
So communication in this
case is very important,
not in the same office.
So we've got IRC channels,
we've got a website with a blog on it,
you've probably seen the blog before,
and we've got mailing lists that
we use to communicate as well.
Okay, so on to some advantages the
Open Development Model brings.
The first is bug and feature visibility.
This means that you can file bug reports,
you can see bug reports
other people have filed,
and you can see features
as they're being developed.
Then there's also the widespread
adoption that having the open
source development encourages.
And third,
there's the rapid change that the
Open Development Model also encourages.
So as I just mentioned,
there is good communication in bugs.
The bug database is publicly available.
You can log in.
You can search for bugs before
you file them to see what
other people have encountered.
You can interact with the engineers that
are working on resolving your issues.
And you can basically see exactly when
the fix for your bug has been landed.
When we land fixes,
we say exactly which revision in the
source code repository it was fixed in.
You can make sure you've got
that revision nightly build or
source code of that revision,
and you can test the fix out.
This also applies to features.
When features are landed,
we tend to mention them
on the blog occasionally.
Or if you track the might be builds,
you'll see them pop
up and you'll be like,
well, this is really cool.
When you see these new
features on the blog,
one thing we like to get is
feedback on the features.
There are a lot of features we adopt
from upcoming standards like HTML 5.
These standards are still
in heavy development.
So feedback that you get about
uses of the new features can help
shape the way the web standards
are moving in the future.
This means that it helps ensure that
the APIs that are being adopted in
the future and the new syntax is
the most elegant and simple ones,
yet still really powerful.
So WebKit is a great easy
to understand code base.
It's three quarters of
a million lines of code,
more or less, which is relatively small
compared to other browser engines,
but yet it's also really easy
to understand and get involved.
It has a great feature set.
It supports a lot of
new upcoming standards.
It has great support
for existing standards,
and it also has exceptional performance.
It's one of the fastest
browser engines out there.
And it does all this in
a very small footprint,
both in terms of memory use when it's
running and the footprint on disk.
This has led to being adopted
heavily throughout the
system applications in Apple.
Obviously, Safari uses it,
and iChat uses it for
displaying message transcripts,
and Dashboard uses it heavily, obviously,
as well.
It's also used by a lot of
third-party applications.
It's used by the OmniWeb
browser from the Omni Group.
It's used by Sandbox
from Corealia Software.
It's used by many other third-party
applications from instant
messaging programs through to
newsreaders and things like that.
It's also being adopted
heavily on different platforms.
It's being adopted by Nokia on
the S60 platform and by Google for
their upcoming Android platform.
You might be wondering,
why do I care if it's adopted
on these other platforms?
There are a couple of
good reasons to care.
The more people that use WebKit,
the more testing it gets,
the more engineers
that are working on it.
This leads to improved performance,
improved stability, and more bug reports,
more bugs fixed.
Um, As a wise man once said,
many eyes make all bugs shallow.
The second reason is that
it promotes web standards.
Traditionally, on mobile platforms,
web standards have not been something
that vendors have cared about.
By having WebKit,
which is a great standards-compliant
browser on lots of more devices,
it means you can code to the web
standards and things just work great.
It also allows you to adopt
WebKit features more widely.
Most WebKit features that are
WebKit-specific have gracefully
degrade on other devices,
so it's great to enhance your
applications or sites for WebKit and have
them work great on other devices as well.
So the third main point is,
how do you get involved
with this project?
There are three big ways to get involved,
starting from testing,
then filing bug reports,
and then moving on to
contributing of code.
So since the WebKit project,
we moved to open development
model in June of 2005.
We've had over 250 people contribute.
This is a huge number of people,
and we're very excited about this.
But I want it to be even more people.
Working with these open source
contributors is probably
the best part of my job.
Dealing with people from
all around the world,
learning lots of new things
about different countries,
and also the new skills that these
people bring to the project is great.
So there are a lot of different
reasons why these people come
to the project and contribute.
Some of them want to
contribute a pet feature.
A great example of this is some
developers from the KDE project
decided that they really liked SVG,
Scalable Vector Graphics.
So they had a partial
implementation of SVG,
which they reworked to
work with WebKit and then
contributed this code to WebKit,
which was the basis for
WebKit's SVG support.
The second big reason
is to fix a pet bug.
You may be a user that uses Safari,
come across a bug in a website that you
use every day and this bug annoys you.
Filing bug reports,
fixing the bugs is a great way
to get those issues resolved.
A third big reason is contributors
like to port WebKit to all
sorts of crazy platforms.
A couple of mainstream ports that we've
got in the WebKit Subversion Repository
are to the QT toolkit from Troll
Tech and to their GTK toolkit as well.
People have ported it to all
sorts of strange platforms like,
what have we got,
Aros and some Beos clone as well.
This is not saying that we want
open source developers to do all
the work and Apple to sit back and
take lots of code from everyone.
At the moment,
it's about 80% of the contributions
are from Apple engineers.
One reason for this is that
Apple has got a habit of hiring
all the talented engineers from the
open source community because we
like people working hard on WebKit.
Okay, so how to get involved.
Testing with WebKit is by far
the easiest way to get involved.
It's really simple.
You can download a nightly
build from nightly.webkit.org,
or you can compile from source yourself.
Just have to browse around
your favorite sites.
If you run into any problems,
you can head over to the bug
database and file a bug report.
It's also really simple to
test these nightly builds of
WebKit with your own applications.
If you're developing an application
that embeds WebKit on the desktop,
it's great to know that we haven't broken
any functionality in your application.
Or you can also get a start on adopting
these new features ahead of time.
So, as I mentioned,
occasionally you'll be browsing the web,
go to a website,
you're expecting it to look like this,
standard Flickr page.
Occasionally,
the website will look slightly wonky.
That's not good.
First step there is filing a bug report.
Filing good bug reports is really useful.
Bug reports that describe a
single problem are the best ones.
Downloading a build of WebKit,
noticing a dozen different problems,
and writing them in a single bug report
makes life difficult for the engineers
that will tackle those problems.
They have to work out
which bugs are related,
split them up.
It gets complicated.
Providing clear steps to reproduce
bugs is really useful as well.
The easiest way for someone
to fix your bug is to be able
to reproduce it themselves,
and then they can investigate
the problem directly.
Detailed steps to reproduce is great.
Part of that is providing a URL that
reproduces the problem if it's a
website that's giving you trouble,
or a test application if it's a use of
the WebKit API or something like that,
which is showing a problem.
Including the WebKit version
number is very useful.
Having a bug report against a
six-week-old build of WebKit is
not so great because the bug
may have already been fixed.
Bug reports against three-year-old
versions of WebKit are even less useful,
so it's great to know upfront whether
or not the issue is still going
to be there when we look into it.
Okay, so given this Flickr page,
there's like thousands of lines of HTML.
Where do you go?
How do you even start looking
at where the problem is?
Most websites nowadays
are a big mass of HTML,
JavaScript, and CSS, thousands of lines,
hundreds of kilobytes of code.
How do you go about
tracking down the problem?
It's quite simple process.
You create a reduced test case.
Basically, what you do is you start
with the original page,
you remove stuff that you think is
probably unrelated to the problem,
you test whether or not
the problem still exists.
If it does still exist,
then the code you removed was unrelated,
and you're fine.
If the problem no longer appears,
clearly the stuff that you removed was
actually relevant to the problem at hand.
You go through this
process several times,
and you eventually end up with
something nice and simple.
This is a reduced test case
for that Flickr problem
I showed a picture of earlier.
It's like eight lines of code
down from several thousand
of the original Flickr page.
From this,
it's relatively straightforward
to see where the problem is.
So once you have a reduced test case,
where do you even start to look in the
code to work out where the problem is,
how to fix it, things like that?
Or even just how to debug the problem.
If you have a reduced test case,
it might not be immediately
obvious why it's failing.
Understanding where the code is
makes it really a lot easier to
debug the problem in a debugger.
So as Darin mentioned earlier,
WebKit is broken up into
three main components.
There is JavaScript Core.
JavaScript Core is
comprised of two main parts,
the virtual machine,
which actually executes
the JavaScript code,
and the runtime,
which provides functionality
like regular expressions,
string manipulation, maths,
and things like that.
Web Core handles the meat of
the web browser side of things,
which is primarily HTML parsing,
which is converting the HTML source
code into the DOM tree used by WebKit.
There is a CSS, which handles parsing,
stylesheets, and associating them with
parts of the DOM tree.
There is a loading,
which is talking to the network layer,
CF Network, as Darin mentioned earlier,
on the Mac,
loading resources from the network layer
and parsing them off the rest of WebCore.
Then there's rendering and the
scalable vector graphics implementation
that I touched on earlier.
The third main part is WebKit,
which is the API layer of the framework.
You may notice that I've got platform
glue in two places on this slide,
both in WebCore and in WebKit.
The reason for this is that
WebKit adapts to the platform
in two main different ways.
The first way,
in the WebKit side of things,
in the blue box there,
is that it provides a
platform-specific API.
This makes it really easy for
platform developers to use the API.
The WebCore side of things is more
integrating with the underlying system,
so this is using the system libraries,
the system functionality,
and also things like the
system look and feel for form
controls and things like that.
Okay, so you understand the code,
you know exactly where the bug is.
I'm not going to cover
how to fix bugs right now.
If you want to learn a
little bit more about that,
we've got a WebKit development lab,
I think, immediately after this session.
Once you have fixed the bug,
it's that easy.
Contributing the code back is
quite straightforward as well.
We have a great policy of
regression testing our code.
We have around 10,000 regression tests,
which we ensure developers run
before every commit that they do.
This ensures that no regressions
are introduced to our code,
which means we can develop at
a really fast pace and not risk
introducing major problems.
We also like to try and enforce a rule of
every change has to come with regression
tests to ensure that the functionality,
the behavior that's changed,
no longer causes problems.
A second thing we like to
enforce is coding style.
As I mentioned,
WebKit is about three-quarters
of a million lines of code.
That's an awful lot of code.
Having a consistent coding style makes it
easy for new developers to approach the
project and you get a handle on the code,
and also keeps some of the developers
working on it every day sane.
Code review is a third important
part of code contribution.
It's probably the most important part.
Before any commit is landed,
it goes through a process of code review,
where a developer that's been
working with WebKit for a long time
goes through the code line by line,
makes sure that there's
nothing odd about it,
makes sure that there
are regression tests,
that the coding style is consistent,
and also looks for any bugs
that may be in the code that
the developer has missed,
and points out any issues that may arise.
This is, in my mind,
the most important part of the process,
because some of the developers
that work on WebKit are
very experienced developers.
They know a lot of stuff, basically.
Working with these senior engineers
when I was new to the project
taught me an awful lot about WebKit,
and also just about
programming in general.
So it's a great way to
learn about programming or
just polish up your skills.
So once you've got your patch reviewed,
someone on the WebKit team
will commit it.
Once they're committed,
they will eventually make their way
out with the WebKit nightly builds and
eventually into a release of Safari.
Releases of Safari have
lots of new features.
[Transcript missing]
Thanks, Mark.
So I'm going to tell you about some
cool new stuff in Safari and WebKit.
We like coding and we
like adding new features,
but as we add all this new functionality,
we try to keep in mind
that we're working for you.
We're really listening to
web developers and following
the world of web technology,
and making sure that what we provide
is something that really makes
sense and will help web developers.
We're also listening
to widget developers.
WebKit is the engine inside Dashboard,
so when you're developing
all your Dashboard widgets,
you can take advantage of all
these improvements we've done.
And finally,
native application developers
are really going to be
interested in these new things,
too.
As Mark mentioned,
more and more applications are embedding
WebKit to use as part of their display
engine or their core user interface.
And all of the new stuff-- that
we're talking about-- will not
only be available in Safari,
but in WebKit when you embed
it in your app as well.
So we have three basic
categories of cool new stuff.
We've got standards improvements.
All the work we do on WebKit is
guided by web standards.
These are very important when
you're developing for the web,
because there's all these
different browsers out there.
Tragically,
not all of them use WebKit yet.
So we need standards to sort of file
the rough edges off the differences,
and make sure everything
works consistently.
We also have a lot of great
performance improvements.
And I'm going to talk about
some of the areas where we
vastly improve performance.
And finally,
I'm going to give you highlights
of some of the new features that
you'll find in this release in
the Safari for Developer preview.
So let's talk about standards first.
Web standards.
There's sort of two areas that
we really think about when
we're looking at web standards.
One is sort of the classics.
That all of you will know about if
you're familiar with web development.
HTML 4.0.1, CSS 2.1, DOM level 2.
These are sort of the core of
your web development experience.
And it's just sort of bread and butter.
And even though these standards
have been out for a long time,
there's still many fine details
where it's taken a long time
for the browsers to agree.
And we have improvements even
down to these basic standards.
A lot of bug fixes going on all the time.
Another thing that we're looking at
is the ability to do a lot of things.
Another big area we look at is
sort of emerging technologies
in the standards world.
Things like SVG.
Things like HTML5,
the next generation of the HTML standard
that adds all sorts of functionality
for web documents and web applications.
And CSS3, which provides really powerful
advanced visual styling.
So we're sort of trying to push
the envelope on these newer
technologies and move the web forward.
and there's also web APIs.
These are sort of new APIs that
add on to the core DOM interfaces
to provide all sorts of additional
functionality if you're doing AJAX-style
development using JavaScript or
what people call Web 2.0 sometimes.
These very rich client
interactive applications.
So, showing a checklist of different
standards is well and good,
but how do you prove it?
Well,
In the web standards community,
there's this tradition of
these things called acid tests.
These are sort of collections of
really challenging web edge cases
of all the different standards that
sort of make sure that you don't
have just the most basic support,
but that you've really gone and
covered every detail of the standard.
So let's take a look at how Safari does
on the different acid tests.
The original acid test, acid one,
was largely a test of
CSS layout and the box model.
This is something that web
developers haven't had to worry
that much about in recent years,
because most browsers have been passing
this test for over five years now,
and Safari's been passing it forever.
But this sort of kicked off
the tradition of acid tests,
and the idea of sort of making
their output look like a quirky,
funny little picture,
so you can see instantly.
So, yeah.
Whether it looks right,
and it's sort of a little amusing.
The next acid test to
come out was acid two.
Safari was the first
browser to pass this,
but since then, Opera,
and now in their latest beta versions,
Firefox and IE as well,
also passed this test.
This test is actually a lot more
challenging than the original acid test.
It covers not only CSS,
but also many details of
HTML parsing and functionality.
It also covers CSS error handling.
If you do a lot of web development,
you probably know that you often have
to put in these hacks to work around
certain browsers that may have bugs.
I'm not going to say which ones,
but its initials are IE.
So it's very important for browsers
to have interoperable error handlings,
that when you put in these hacks,
you're sort of trying to go through
the error handling of the CSS parser.
And it's very important
to be interoperable.
on that level.
And so, this brings us to ACID 3.
And as you can see,
here's a pretty little picture
with little rainbow-colored boxes.
Oh, wait,
that doesn't exactly look right, does it?
I don't think 41 out of
100 is a very good score.
Well,
that's what it looked like in Safari 3.0.
But since then, we've been working on
a lot of improvements.
And in Safari 3.1,
released earlier this year,
we improved the output a lot.
It's looking a lot closer to
how it's supposed to look.
We fixed many bugs.
And now, I'm going to give you a quick
demo of what it looks like in
the Safari 4 developer preview.
Alrighty, let's just launch
Safari here and go to ACID3.
And as you can see, pretty picture.
So let me show you that again.
There it is.
So this test,
if you follow the web standards world,
you probably know there was a lot
of discussion a while ago about
both Safari and Opera getting
very close on that numeric
score and also the rendering.
So this test actually has three
different pass conditions.
One is getting the 100
out of 100 score there,
which is passing all the
individual sub-tests.
But another criterion is
matching the reference rendering.
And as you can see,
I'm flipping tabs back and forth here,
and we've got pixel for pixel identical
match for the reference rendering.
The third pass condition is
smoothness of the animation.
And this you can sort of test by looking
at the timing of the individual tests.
And as you can see,
this dialog box reports no timing issues.
So I would like to announce today the
first browser to fully pass ACID 3,
the Safari 4 Developer Preview.
[Transcript missing]
The final area I'd like to talk
about is new feature highlights.
There's a bunch of new engine features
for your web content in the Safari 4
Developer Preview and in iPhone 2.0.
I'm not going to cover every last one.
I'm just going to give you a couple of
highlights of some of the most exciting
ones and tell you about the other
sessions where you can go to learn
more about different feature areas.
Some of the areas we've improved
include networking and messaging,
where we have a lot of
interesting new capabilities.
Web applications,
lots of things to support offline
web apps and that kind of good stuff.
Graphics and media,
an area that's always been
a strong suit for Apple,
and now we're pushing all the expertise
we have in this area onto the web.
And finally, animation,
something that's kind of
related to graphics and media,
but we think it sort of
deserves a topic all its own.
So for networking messaging,
the key thing we're looking to
deliver is to enable secure mashups.
Mashups are this new web development
technique that's been popular lately
that allows you to sort of mix
content from two different sites
and rearrange it in interesting
ways to sort of create something
greater than the sum of its parts.
You may have heard, for example,
a while ago of an application that
someone made that mixes data from
Craigslist and Google Maps to give
you sort of a map of apartment
listings in different cities.
Well, we're introducing two things to
make mashups a whole lot better.
We're introducing cross-site
XML HTTP requests.
Thank you.
This is a-- we've added
security limitations to it,
so this is opt-in.
But sites can now publish their
data APIs to be accessible directly
from the client side on other sites.
We're also adding
cross-document messaging,
an API called PostMessage,
which is used for sort of the
embedding or widget style of mashup.
You may have seen a lot of sites like,
for example, iGoogle page that can embed
these mini little applets that
may come from other sites.
So now we've added an API so they
can securely communicate back and
forth with their containing web page.
So this allows you to do a lot richer
things with these kind of web widgets.
and a session where you can go to
learn more about this is session 403,
Using Advanced Ajax
Technologies in Safari.
That's coming up Thursday.
If you just write down the number,
you'll hopefully see it on the screens.
And this will also cover a lot more
interesting Ajax-related stuff.
So if you work a lot in that area,
you'll be interested in this session.
Next topic I'd like to talk about
is next generation web apps.
And we have actually two kinds
of features that we're bringing
to enable better web apps.
Some of these are features that
are in the WebKit engine itself,
and others are in the Safari application.
I'm going to talk about both of those.
So for engine features, first feature we
introduced is offline data,
a SQL database that you
can use for local storage,
which enables all your data to be
stored directly on the client machine.
This is available both on the desktop
versions of Safari and on iPhone,
with iPhone 2.0 and Safari 3.1.
So you can use it across the
whole range of platforms.
And we think this is going to enable
a lot of really interesting things.
It's giving you a huge
amount of functionality.
So for engine features,
the first feature we
introduced is offline data,
a SQL database that you
can use for local storage,
which enables all your data to be
stored directly on the client machine.
This is available both on the desktop
versions of Safari and on iPhone,
with iPhone 2.0 and Safari 3.1.
So you can use it across the
whole range of platforms.
And we think this is going to enable
a lot of really interesting things.
It's giving you a huge
amount of functionality.
It's giving you a huge amount of
rich structured storage that goes way
beyond what you can do with cookies.
It's giving you a huge amount of
rich structured storage that goes way
beyond what you can do with cookies.
A new feature that we're announcing today
is support for offline applications.
This is new in the
Safari 4 developer preview.
This is very similar to the
functionality provided by Google Gears.
And we've worked with the Gears team to
make this a part of the HTML5 standard.
The way this technology works is that
you just simply provide a manifest for
your application and now automatically,
the first time the user
visits your web app,
all of the resources that make it up,
the HTML, the CSS, the JavaScript,
and so forth, will be cached locally
and it will work offline,
transparently.
Combined with the offline data storage,
you can use this to build full
offline experiences that work
just like your real web app.
Just the app works offline,
you can store the data offline,
and you can sync it up the
next time the user connects.
We also have Safari level features
that can make web apps better.
So, a while ago,
we introduced Web Clip on the iPhone,
which lets you put any website
directly on your home screen
with its own custom icon,
allowing users to sort of treat different
websites pretty much the same as they
would the native apps of the iPhone.
That makes it fit a lot more smoothly
into the UI because you don't have
to first launch Safari and then go to
bookmarks and then pick the right thing.
So today,
with the Safari 4 developer preview,
we're announcing desktop web apps.
This is a feature very similar to
what you get with Mozilla Prism.
You can have your own custom icons
for different applications on the
dock and launch them directly without
having to go through the browser.
And I would like to give you a
quick demo of that right now.
Alrighty.
Well,
this is kind of too boring to be an app,
but...
I read the Surf and Safari web blog,
which follows WebKit development a lot.
I think I'd like to have
that right on my dock.
So I'm just going to go to the File menu
and pick Save as Web Application.
and boom, there it is.
Custom icon, custom name,
and we've introduced a few markup
level features that let you easily
set up your web applications
to be launched from the dock.
So I'm just going to quit Safari here.
Safari's not even running.
And there it is.
I got my own app for surfing Safari.
Tragically, one of the things that's not
in the distraction-free custom
web app UI is view source.
So I'm going to go back to Safari and
show you the very simple things
I did to have a custom application
name and icon for this site.
Alrighty,
here's the application name line.
All you have to do is add one meta tag.
Meta name equals application name,
content equals surf and Safari.
A lot of sites have very
long titles that may indicate
things like status information,
like unread count.
So this is a way to have
a short name for the app,
which is what appears in the
doc and on the file system.
And multi-size icons.
You can have a real ICNS file
just like you do for Mac apps,
which lets it resize nicely in the doc.
[Transcript missing]
This is just the beginning of what
it takes to make web applications
feel more like native apps.
But we think this is a
really exciting direction.
And now, on the desktop too,
users aren't going to have to go through
the browser to get to your web apps.
They'll be able to save as web
application and have an icon straight
on their dock to launch your web app.
All righty.
Is it for demo?
And let's move on.
So sessions where you can-- oh,
there was my demo slide.
OK.
Sessions where you can
learn more about this.
Session 411,
Utilizing Offline Data in Safari,
will tell you a lot
about the application,
offline data,
and standalone web app features.
The standalone web app
feature I just demoed.
You can learn how to enable
them for your web apps.
And that's coming up on Thursday.
The other session, unfortunately-- no,
wait.
Still coming up.
Session 352 on Wednesday will
tell you a lot about different
iPhone development techniques.
And that'll tell you how you
can use a lot of these web app
related features on iPhone.
Next topic I'd like to talk about:
graphics and media.
So we like to let you do cool stuff.
We like to let you make apps that
look really smooth and polished
and that just make people say "wow"
just the moment they first see it.
So,
We're introducing a lot of features.
Starting with Safari 3.1,
we support the audio and
video elements from HTML5.
These make media a first-class
citizen of the web.
There are no plugins required.
Directly part of HTML,
you can reference video and audio files
and you have your choice of built-in
controls or a rich scripting API that
you can use to put audio and video in
your web applications and documents
and give a rich user experience.
We also support SVG as an image.
SVG is a technology.
It stands for Scalable Vector Graphics,
and it's sort of a format
similar to PDF or Illustrator
in that it has a vector-based
scalable description of an image.
And we're now allowing you to use
it in the image element or anywhere
that CSS images are allowed.
So that means if you want to have
a fancy scalable background--
All right, thank you, thank you.
If you want to have a
fancy scalable background,
you don't have to waste a lot of
bandwidth to send a giant image,
you can just have the simple XML file
that describes what it should look like.
And a lot of the kinds of things you do
will totally fit into a very small SVG.
And that's in Safari 3.1,
so you can use it today.
Next thing we're offering
is Canvas Bitmap Access.
This is going to allow
a lot of amazing things.
Apple first introduced the
Canvas element to HTML.
It's now part of the HTML5 standard.
And we will now be allowing
you to directly get at the
pixels inside the Canvas,
which actually,
with our new faster JavaScript engine,
lets you do client-side
image filter effects.
And this is really amazing.
And when you see the session on this,
you will not believe that you can do
those kinds of things in JavaScript.
The final thing is Advanced CSS.
We supported all the
CSS basics for a long time.
We like to push the envelope.
In the Safari 4 developer preview,
we're going to have a lot
of awesome new CSS stuff.
We are supporting
gradients directly in CSS.
So no more need to send custom images
just to have a gradient background.
We know those are very popular.
Now there's direct CSS syntax for it.
We support masking,
which lets you put little shaped
masks around your images or
put rounded corners on things,
all sorts of cool stuff.
And we support reflections.
No Web 2.0 app is complete
without reflections.
Now you don't have to draw
a custom image to do it.
All right, and a final topic-- OK,
the sessions about this topic
where you can learn more are 344,
Adding Rich Graphics and Media,
which will have those mind-blowing
demos that I talked about.
That's coming up this afternoon.
Don't miss it.
And another session,
preparing and delivering
video for iPhones,
Safari, and Apple TV,
where you can learn about how to
construct your media files to be usable
with this new video element to work great
on iPhone and all our desktop platforms.
So make sure to note these sessions,
and you will see lots of cool stuff.
Final topic I'd like to
talk about is animation.
So in native UI, on the desktop,
and on the iPhone,
animation is becoming sort of
a fundamental paradigm of UI.
You don't just automatically
switch things and have things
jerk around on the user.
Everybody wants nice, smooth,
flowing animations.
And this is becoming very
popular on the web too.
And a lot of JavaScript libraries
have been written with tons of code
to animate your interface elements.
And we think that you can do a lot
better by providing native animation
capabilities in the browser so you
don't have to have these piles of
script code just to do basic animations.
So the first feature we're introducing
in this area is SVG animation in
the Safari for Developer preview.
This is a standards-based
technology that's part of SVG.
It sort of lets you make your vector
graphics animate different parts of it.
And it's sort of like the vector
equivalent of an animated GIF.
You can use it for lots of cool stuff.
But we think that doesn't go far enough,
because SVG is a great technology.
But most of you are
building with HTML and CSS.
And you'd sort of like to
animate the content that's
already in your web application.
So we're introducing CSS transitions
on both desktop and iPhone.
This is a very powerful
technology that lets you,
with very simple CSS syntax,
animate a transition.
from one UI state to another.
We're also introducing CSS transforms,
which provide you the full range of
affine transforms with CSS syntax.
You can rotate things,
you can scale them, you can skew them.
And these go great with the
transitions because often a
rotation or a scale is just the kind
of thing that you want to animate.
So just to give you a taste of what
you can do with these technologies,
I'm going to do a quick demo of
CSS transitions and transforms.
All righty, so I've made this quickie
demo of features in Leopard.
I know it's a little dated now
that Snow Leopard's been announced,
but, you know, it was secret.
So this is the best you can do.
And as you can see, as I hover over these
different menu items,
they animate smoothly and zoom out.
When I click on them, the color changes.
That's also animated smoothly.
And as you can see,
the image there is rotated.
So there's a couple of great things
about this besides just the basic thing.
One is that I'm doing this
all in straight HTML and CSS.
There's no fancy plug-ins required
just to get this kind of nice,
smooth, animated UI.
No piles of JavaScript.
The other nice thing about
it is how easy it is to do.
My HTML is extremely simple here,
and if you give me a moment
to go to the CSS file,
I've had to add very little CSS to
get these transitions to animate.
Basically, this is it.
Just give WebKit transition duration,
WebKit transition function,
and now when you change the class
on an element and its style changes,
we'll automatically interpolate
the states and give you a
nice-looking transition.
So...
That's how easy it is.
It works right with
your CSS-based design.
Sure.
TextZoom.
That is basically all I had to add,
those two lines,
to this CSS rule to get it to animate.
And so you've got the starting
background color here.
And as you can see,
all I've done to affect the transition
is there's also this hover rule.
This works natively with CSS Hover.
And it just adds the styles that changed.
And the transition rules make
these automatically interpolate
and animate in a smooth way,
not a jerky way.
So if you want to see what
the markup looks like,
This is all clean semantic HTML markup.
I didn't crup this up.
As you can see,
I just got an H1 element for the header.
Everything here is an unordered list.
In fact, if you try viewing this
page without a style sheet,
we'll be releasing the
code for this demo.
If you view this page
without a style sheet,
you can see that it's
perfectly clean HTML,
works great with accessibility,
works great with search engines,
and all that good stuff.
So there you go.
Alrighty.
And I'm sure you'll be wanting
to learn more about these
new animation technologies.
So you can learn later this afternoon
in Creating Rich User Interfaces for
Web Content in Safari about this new
animation stuff and a whole lot more.
And on Wednesday,
you can learn about how you
can apply these technologies
to your iPhone web apps.
So to sum up,
The message I'd like to
leave you with is this:
WebKit is the future of web technology.
We're pushing ahead on standards,
performance, features and functionality,
and we're really pushing
the envelope on the web.
And we hope that you enjoy using
this new stuff in your apps.
And now I'd like to hand
it back to Darin Adler.
So just before we go and do Q&A,
I just want to remind you a little bit
more about what was in this session
and what's coming up this week.
So we talked a little bit
about Safari and WebKit,
WebKit, the engine inside Safari.
We talked about our open development
model and this list of new features.
And I want you to understand the
relationship between these things.
The way our development works and the
reason we're able to do so much great new
stuff is the rapid progress we can make
because of the open development model and
the way that we approach it with testing.
And that directly translates to
more good stuff for you to use.
But even going beyond that,
our work is intertwined
with the standards work.
And so these things
that you see in WebKit,
and you see them in WebKit first,
eventually the other
browser engines catch up.
A long time ago,
ACID 2 was only passing in WebKit.
Now the other browser
engines are catching up.
The same thing will happen with ACID 3,
and the same thing will happen with
these other kinds of innovations.
So on that note,
I'd like to remind you that
you can get more information
by talking to our evangelists,
Vicki Murley and Mark Malone.
and I'd like to ask the other speakers
and Vicki Murli to come up for Q&A.